= Basic Configuration =

This page outlines the basic configuration settings for DreamFactory. For the most part, this entails adding or updating parameters in the .env file located in the <code>dreamfactory</code> directory. Common tasks and procedures are outlined below, and each parameter is individually documented in the '''Configuration Parameters''' section of this page.

For web server configurations, check the child pages of this section for your specific web server.
<span id="common-configuration-tasks-and-faqs"></span>
== Common configuration tasks and FAQs ==

<span id="changing-configuration"></span>
=== Changing configuration ===

Any time configurations are changed in the .env file, at a minimum, the confguration cache must be cleared. This is done by running <code>php artisan config:clear</code> in the <code>dreamfactory</code> directory.

<span id="enable-debugging"></span>
=== Enable debugging ===

Two parameters are used for this process:

* <code>APP_LOG_LEVEL</code> : Set to <code>debug</code> for debug mode. Other levels are described in the parameter listing below.
* <code>APP_DEBUG</code> : Set to <code>true</code> to turn on application debug messages. This triggers DreamFactory to return a payload with a trace for error(s).

<span id="changing-the-system-database"></span>
=== Changing the system database ===

This requires updating the connection to your database type (mysql, sqlsrv, pgsql, sqlite) and providing the necessary connection details.

* <code>DB_CONNECTION</code>: Type of database connection.
* <code>DB_HOST</code>: Database host address.
* <code>DB_PORT</code>: Database port number.
* <code>DB_DATABASE</code>: Database name.
* <code>DB_USERNAME</code>: Database username.
* <code>DB_PASSWORD</code>: Database password.

<span id="caching-settings"></span>
=== Caching settings ===

To update the default cache (file) to an external cache (Memcache or Redis), or to a local alternative (apc, array, database, file) you can update the following values.

* <code>CACHE_DRIVER</code>: Cache driver type.
* <code>CACHE_DEFAULT_TTL</code>: Default cache TTL in seconds.
* <code>CACHE_PREFIX</code>: Prefix for cache keys.
* <code>CACHE_PATH</code>: Cache path for 'file' driver.
* <code>CACHE_TABLE</code>: Cache table for 'database' driver.
* <code>CACHE_HOST</code>, <code>CACHE_PORT</code>, <code>CACHE_PASSWORD</code>, <code>CACHE_WEIGHT</code>, <code>CACHE_PERSISTENT_ID</code>, <code>CACHE_USERNAME</code>, <code>CACHE_DATABASE</code>: Cache settings for 'memcached' or 'redis'.

<span id="configuration-parameters"></span>
== Configuration parameters ==

Below, the .env in its entirety is outlined and every parameter described. These parameters are listed in the order/section they would normally exist on a DreamFactory instance.

<span id="application-settings"></span>
=== Application settings ===

* <code>ASSET_URL</code>: Configures the asset URL host.
* <code>VIEW_COMPILED_PATH</code>: Location for compiled Blade templates.
* <code>BCRYPT_ROUNDS</code>: Options for Bcrypt password hashing.
* <code>APP_NAME</code>: Name of the application.
* <code>APP_CIPHER</code>: Encryption cipher options.
* <code>APP_DEBUG</code>: Debugging trace toggle in exceptions.
* <code>APP_ENV</code>: Environment type (local, production).
* <code>APP_KEY</code>: Application encryption key.
* <code>APP_LOCALE</code>: Default application locale.
* <code>LOG_CHANNEL</code>: Configuration for log channels.
* <code>APP_LOG_LEVEL</code>: Log level setting.
* <code>APP_LOG_MAX_FILES</code>: Max log files for 'daily' logging.
* <code>APP_TIMEZONE</code>: Timezone setting for PHP functions.
* <code>APP_URL</code>: External URL for the installation.
* <code>DF_LANDING_PAGE</code>: Default landing page URL.

<span id="database-settings"></span>
=== Database settings ===

* <code>DB_CONNECTION</code>: Type of database connection.
* <code>DB_HOST</code>: Database host address.
* <code>DB_PORT</code>: Database port number.
* <code>DB_DATABASE</code>: Database name.
* <code>DB_USERNAME</code>: Database username.
* <code>DB_PASSWORD</code>: Database password.
* <code>DB_CHARSET</code>: Database character set.
* <code>DB_COLLATION</code>: Database collation setting.
* <code>DB_QUERY_LOG_ENABLED</code>: Toggle for database query logging.
* <code>DB_MAX_RECORDS_RETURNED</code>: Max records returned in queries.
* <code>DF_SQLITE_STORAGE</code>: Location for SQLite3 database files.
* <code>DF_FREETDS_SQLSRV</code>, <code>DF_FREETDS_SQLANYWHERE</code>, <code>DF_FREETDS_SYBASE</code>, <code>DF_FREETDS_DUMP</code>, <code>DF_FREETDS_DUMPCONFIG</code>: FreeTDS configuration settings.

<span id="cache-settings"></span>
=== Cache settings ===

* <code>CACHE_DRIVER</code>: Cache driver type.
* <code>CACHE_DEFAULT_TTL</code>: Default cache TTL in seconds.
* <code>CACHE_PREFIX</code>: Prefix for cache keys.
* <code>CACHE_PATH</code>: Cache path for 'file' driver.
* <code>CACHE_TABLE</code>: Cache table for 'database' driver.
* <code>CACHE_HOST</code>, <code>CACHE_PORT</code>, <code>CACHE_PASSWORD</code>, <code>CACHE_WEIGHT</code>, <code>CACHE_PERSISTENT_ID</code>, <code>CACHE_USERNAME</code>, <code>CACHE_DATABASE</code>: Cache settings for 'memcached' or 'redis'.

<span id="limit-cache-settings"></span>
=== Limit cache settings ===

* <code>LIMIT_CACHE_DRIVER</code>: Limit cache driver type.
* <code>LIMIT_CACHE_PREFIX</code>: Prefix for limit cache keys.
* <code>LIMIT_CACHE_PATH</code>: Path for 'file' limit cache.
* <code>LIMIT_CACHE_TABLE</code>: Table for 'database' limit cache.
* <code>LIMIT_CACHE_HOST</code>, <code>LIMIT_CACHE_PORT</code>, <code>LIMIT_CACHE_PASSWORD</code>, <code>LIMIT_CACHE_WEIGHT</code>, <code>LIMIT_CACHE_PERSISTENT_ID</code>, <code>LIMIT_CACHE_USERNAME</code>, <code>LIMIT_CACHE_DATABASE</code>: Limit cache settings for 'memcached' or 'redis'.

<span id="queuing-settings"></span>
=== Queuing settings ===

* <code>QUEUE_CONNECTION</code>: Queue connection type.
* <code>QUEUE_NAME</code>: Name of the queue.
* <code>QUEUE_RETRY_AFTER</code>: Retry time for failed jobs.
* <code>QUEUE_TABLE</code>: Queue table for 'database' driver.
* <code>AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID</code>, <code>AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY</code>, <code>AWS_DEFAULT_REGION</code>, <code>SQS_PREFIX</code>: AWS SQS settings.
* <code>QUEUE_HOST</code>, <code>QUEUE_PORT</code>, <code>QUEUE_DATABASE</code>, <code>QUEUE_PASSWORD</code>: Queue settings for 'beanstalkd' or 'redis'.

<span id="event-broadcasting-settings"></span>
=== Event broadcasting settings ===

* <code>BROADCAST_DRIVER</code>: Broadcasting driver type.
* <code>PUSHER_APP_ID</code>, <code>PUSHER_APP_KEY</code>, <code>PUSHER_APP_SECRET</code>: Pusher settings.
* <code>BROADCAST_HOST</code>, <code>BROADCAST_PORT</code>, <code>BROADCAST_DATABASE</code>, <code>BROADCAST_PASSWORD</code>: Broadcast settings for 'redis'.

<span id="dreamfactory-settings"></span>
=== DreamFactory settings ===

* <code>DF_LOGIN_ATTRIBUTE</code>: User authentication attribute.
* <code>DF_ENABLE_ALTERNATE_AUTH</code>: Toggle for alternate authentication.
* <code>DF_ENABLE_WINDOWS_AUTH</code>: Windows authentication for AD SSO.
* <code>DF_CONFIRM_CODE_LENGTH</code>: Length of user confirmation code.
* <code>DF_CONFIRM_CODE_TTL</code>: TTL for confirmation code.
* <code>JWT_SECRET</code>: JWT encryption secret.
* <code>DF_JWT_TTL</code>, <code>DF_JWT_REFRESH_TTL</code>, <code>DF_ALLOW_FOREVER_SESSIONS</code>: JWT session settings.
* <code>DF_JWT_USER_CLAIM</code>: Custom JWT claim fields.
* <code>DF_CONFIRM_RESET_URL</code>, <code>DF_CONFIRM_INVITE_URL</code>, <code>DF_CONFIRM_REGISTER_URL</code>: URLs for user actions.

<span id="storage-settings"></span>
=== Storage settings ===

* <code>DF_FILE_CHUNK_SIZE</code>: Chunk size for downloadable files.

<span id="scripting-settings"></span>
=== Scripting settings ===

* <code>DF_SCRIPTING_DISABLE</code>: Disables specific scripting languages.
* <code>DF_NODEJS_PATH</code>: Path to Node.js executable.
* <code>DF_PYTHON_PATH</code>: Path to Python executable.
* <code>DF_PYTHON3_PATH</code>: Path to Python3 executable.
* <code>DF_SCRIPTING_DEFAULT_PROTOCOL</code>: Default protocol for scripting calls.
* <code>DF_SCRIPT_INLINE_CHAR_LIMIT</code>: Inline script character limit.

<span id="api-settings"></span>
=== API settings ===

* <code>DF_API_ROUTE_PREFIX</code>: Prefix for API routes.
* <code>DF_STATUS_ROUTE_PREFIX</code>: Prefix for status routes.
* <code>DF_STORAGE_ROUTE_PREFIX</code>: Prefix for storage routes.
* <code>DF_XML_ROOT</code>: Root tag for XML responses.
* <code>DF_ALWAYS_WRAP_RESOURCES</code>, <code>DF_RESOURCE_WRAPPER</code>: Resource wrapping settings.
* <code>DF_CONTENT_TYPE</code>: Default response content-type.
* <code>DF_LOOKUP_MODIFIERS</code>: Allowed lookup modifiers.
* <code>DF_PACKAGE_PATH</code>: Path for package import at launch.
* <code>DF_INSTALL</code>: Installation source.

<span id="managed-settings"></span>
=== Managed settings ===

* <code>DF_MANAGED</code>: Managed environment toggle.
* <code>DF_MANAGED_LOG_PATH</code>, <code>DF_MANAGED_CACHE_PATH</code>, <code>DF_MANAGED_LOG_ROTATE_COUNT</code>, <code>DF_MANAGED_LOG_FILE_NAME</code>, <code>DF_LIMITS_CACHE_STORE</code>, <code>DF_LIMITS_CACHE_PATH</code>: Managed environment settings.
* <code>SENDMAIL_DEFAULT_COMMAND</code>: Default sendmail command.
* <code>DF_REGISTER_CONTACT</code>: Registration contact information.

<span id="logsdb-settings"></span>
=== LogsDB settings ===

* <code>LOGSDB_ENABLED</code>: LogsDB enabled toggle.
* <code>LOGSDB_HOST</code>, <code>LOGSDB_PORT</code>, <code>LOGSDB_DATABASE</code>, <code>LOGSDB_USERNAME</code>, <code>LOGSDB_PASSWORD</code>: LogsDB settings.

<span id="license-key"></span>
=== License key ===

* <code>DF_LICENSE_KEY</code>: DreamFactory license key.

== See also ==
* [[Getting_Started/Date_Time|Date and Time Configuration]]

[[Category:Getting_Started]]
[[Category:Basic]]
[[Category:Configuration]]
