<span id="web-server-optimization"></span>
= Web Server Optimization =

The web server is a critical component of your DreamFactory deployment. Proper configuration of NGINX or Apache, combined with PHP-FPM tuning, can dramatically improve API throughput and response latency. This guide covers the essential settings for production DreamFactory environments.

<span id="nginx-configuration"></span>
== NGINX Configuration ==

NGINX is the recommended web server for DreamFactory due to its efficient event-driven architecture and superior performance under high concurrency. Below is a production-ready NGINX configuration for DreamFactory:

<syntaxhighlight lang="nginx">server {
    listen 80;
    server_name api.example.com;
    root /opt/dreamfactory/public;
    index index.php;

    # Gzip compression for API responses
    gzip on;
    gzip_types application/json text/plain text/css application/javascript;
    gzip_min_length 256;
    gzip_comp_level 5;

    # Increase client body size for file uploads
    client_max_body_size 100M;

    # Keepalive connections
    keepalive_timeout 65;
    keepalive_requests 1000;

    location / {
        try_files $uri $uri/ /index.php?$query_string;
    }

    location ~ \.php$ {
        fastcgi_pass unix:/run/php/php8.2-fpm.sock;
        fastcgi_param SCRIPT_FILENAME $document_root$fastcgi_script_name;
        include fastcgi_params;

        # Buffer and timeout settings for large API responses
        fastcgi_buffer_size 32k;
        fastcgi_buffers 16 32k;
        fastcgi_read_timeout 300;
    }

    # Deny access to hidden files
    location ~ /\. {
        deny all;
    }
}</syntaxhighlight>
<span id="key-nginx-tuning-parameters"></span>
=== Key NGINX Tuning Parameters ===

In the main <code>nginx.conf</code> file, adjust the following global settings:

<syntaxhighlight lang="nginx">worker_processes auto;           # Match the number of CPU cores
worker_connections 4096;         # Max simultaneous connections per worker
multi_accept on;                 # Accept multiple connections at once</syntaxhighlight>
Enable gzip compression to reduce bandwidth usage for JSON API responses. This is especially important for endpoints returning large datasets.

<span id="apache-configuration"></span>
== Apache Configuration ==

If you are using Apache instead of NGINX, ensure the following modules are enabled:

<syntaxhighlight lang="bash">sudo a2enmod rewrite deflate headers ssl
sudo systemctl restart apache2</syntaxhighlight>
A minimal Apache virtual host configuration for DreamFactory:

<syntaxhighlight lang="apache"><VirtualHost *:80>
    ServerName api.example.com
    DocumentRoot /opt/dreamfactory/public

    <Directory /opt/dreamfactory/public>
        AllowOverride All
        Require all granted
        Options -Indexes +FollowSymLinks
    </Directory>

    # Enable compression
    <IfModule mod_deflate.c>
        AddOutputFilterByType DEFLATE application/json text/html text/plain text/css application/javascript
    </IfModule>
</VirtualHost></syntaxhighlight>
<code>AllowOverride All</code> is required for DreamFactory's <code>.htaccess</code> routing rules. Without it, all API routes will return 404 errors.
<span id="php-fpm-pool-tuning"></span>
== PHP-FPM Pool Tuning ==

PHP-FPM (FastCGI Process Manager) manages the pool of PHP worker processes that handle API requests. Proper pool sizing is critical for handling concurrent API traffic.

Edit your PHP-FPM pool configuration (typically at <code>/etc/php/8.2/fpm/pool.d/www.conf</code>):

<syntaxhighlight lang="ini">[www]
; Use static process management for predictable performance
pm = static
pm.max_children = 50

; Or use dynamic management for variable workloads
; pm = dynamic
; pm.max_children = 50
; pm.start_servers = 10
; pm.min_spare_servers = 5
; pm.max_spare_servers = 20

; Recycle workers after handling N requests (prevents memory leaks)
pm.max_requests = 1000

; Slow request logging for debugging
request_slowlog_timeout = 10s
slowlog = /var/log/php-fpm-slow.log</syntaxhighlight>
<span id="calculating-pm.max_children"></span>
=== Calculating pm.max_children ===

The formula for determining the maximum number of PHP-FPM workers:

<pre>pm.max_children = Available RAM / Average PHP process memory</pre>
For example, on a server with 4GB of RAM dedicated to PHP-FPM and an average PHP process size of 50MB:

<pre>pm.max_children = 4096MB / 50MB = ~80</pre>
Reserve memory for the operating system, database, and web server. A conservative rule is to allocate 60-70% of total RAM to PHP-FPM.

<span id="ssltls-configuration"></span>
== SSL/TLS Configuration ==

Always serve DreamFactory APIs over HTTPS in production. A recommended NGINX SSL configuration:

<syntaxhighlight lang="nginx">server {
    listen 443 ssl http2;
    server_name api.example.com;

    ssl_certificate /etc/ssl/certs/api.example.com.pem;
    ssl_certificate_key /etc/ssl/private/api.example.com.key;
    ssl_protocols TLSv1.2 TLSv1.3;
    ssl_ciphers HIGH:!aNULL:!MD5;
    ssl_prefer_server_ciphers on;
    ssl_session_cache shared:SSL:10m;
    ssl_session_timeout 10m;

    # HSTS header
    add_header Strict-Transport-Security "max-age=31536000; includeSubDomains" always;

    # ... rest of server block
}</syntaxhighlight>
<span id="reverse-proxy-considerations"></span>
== Reverse Proxy Considerations ==

When running DreamFactory behind a load balancer or reverse proxy (e.g., AWS ALB, Cloudflare, HAProxy), configure the following in your <code>.env</code> file:

<syntaxhighlight lang="bash"># Trust proxy headers for correct client IP detection
TRUST_PROXIES=*

# If the proxy terminates SSL
HTTPS_FORCE=true</syntaxhighlight>
Ensure the proxy forwards the <code>X-Forwarded-For</code>, <code>X-Forwarded-Proto</code>, and <code>Host</code> headers so DreamFactory can correctly identify client IPs and generate proper URLs in API responses.

== See also ==
* [[Getting_Started/Php_Laravel|PHP and Laravel]]
* [[Getting_Started/Database|Database APIs]]

[[Category:Nginx]]
[[Category:Apache]]
[[Category:Php-Fpm]]
[[Category:Getting_Started]]
